LoRaQ: Optimized Low Rank Approximation for 4-bit Quantization

Yann Bouquet 1 2 Alireza Khodamoradi 1 Sophie Yáng Shen 1 Kristof Denolf 1 Mathieu Salzmann 2

arXiv:2604.18117v1 [cs.LG] 20 Apr 2026

Abstract

Recent works effectively reduce quantization errors using
channel-wise scaling and low-rank approximations (Xiao
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2025). These methods posit that
maintaining critical weight information at higher precision
(typically 16-bit) is essential for preserving performance.
However, we demonstrate that this high-precision requirement is unnecessary. By ignoring modern hardware capabilities for sub-16 bit mixed-precision, existing approaches
miss the potential of fully quantized pipelines that yield
superior results.

Post-training quantization (PTQ) is essential
for deploying large diffusion transformers on
resource-constrained hardware, but aggressive
4-bit quantization significantly degrades generative performance. Low-rank approximation methods have emerged as a promising solution by
appending auxiliary linear branches to restore
performance. However, current state-of-the-art
approaches assume these branches must retain
high precision (W16A16) and rely on heavy, datadependent calibration for initialization. We challenge both limitations with LoRaQ (Low-Rank
Approximated Quantization), a simple, data-free
calibration approach that optimizes quantization
error compensation. By overcoming the need for
high-precision branches, LoRaQ enables the first
fully sub-16 bit pipeline, allowing the low-rank
branch itself to be quantized. We demonstrate
that, at equal memory overhead, LoRaQ outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in their native
implementations on PixArt-Σ and SANA. We also
analyze mixed-precision configurations, showing
that setups such as W8A8, W6A6, and W4A8 for
the low-rank branch, alongside a W4 main layer,
yield superior results while maintaining a fully
quantized architecture compatible with modern
mixed-precision hardware.

Furthermore, existing methods rely on costly, datadependent calibration. This imposes significant overhead,
limiting the quantization of large models on constrained
resources. We argue that quantization methods should not
only enable deployment on smaller hardware but also be
accessible on such hardware. Our proposed data-free optimization framework aligns with this philosophy, offering
a lightweight alternative that minimizes quantization error
directly through the low-rank branch.
Our contributions are threefold. First, we introduce a novel
optimization for the low-rank branch that is lightweight
and data-free, enabling efficient model calibration with optimized performance. Second, we achieve the first fully
quantized linear layer operating entirely in sub-16 bit precision, utilizing mixed-precision strategies and micro-scaling
formats for both weights and activations to surpass current
state-of-the-art quality. Third, we release an open-source
PTQ library for transformer blocks to address the limitations
of current tools, which lack support for diverse quantization
schemes and multi-GPU calibration.

1. Introduction

We contextualize our approach within the landscape of diffusion quantization before introducing the Low Rank Approximated Quantization (LoRaQ) framework. Illustrated
in Figure 1, our method decomposes linear layers into a
low-rank and a residual branch. Our optimization strategy
focuses on the low-rank matrices, which uniquely determine
the residual weights and facilitate the quantization of the
low-rank branch itself. In the experiments section, we show
on different datasets and models that LoRaQ outperforms
the state-of-the-art SVDQuant that relies on full-precision
branches across multiple metrics. We also analyze various
mixed-precision configurations of our method, considering
the support for such operations in modern hardware.

The growth of large-scale diffusion transformers (BlackForest-Labs, 2024; Esser et al., 2024) demands efficient
inference strategies. Quantization reduces computational
and memory costs, enabling deployment across diverse hardware. However, aggressive quantization often degrades generative fidelity due to the sensitivity of these architectures
to perturbations during their iterative denoising process.
1
Research and Advancement Development Team, Advanced
Micro Devices, Inc, USA 2 Computer Vision Laboratory, Ecole
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Yann Bouquet <yann.bouquet@epfl.ch>.

Preprint. April 21, 2026.

1

LoRaQ: Optimized Low Rank Approximation for 4-bit Quantization

timestep, and channel dimensions. Early quantization efforts struggled with systematic activation outliers which contributed to a degradation of accuracy (Dettmers et al., 2022;
Wei et al., 2023). A notable breakthrough was achieved by
Xiao et al. (2023), enabling efficient 8-bit weight quantization (W8) and 8-bit activation quantization (A8) through
the transfer of quantization difficulty from activations to
weights using per-channel scaling transformations. Employing these techniques for diffusion models has evolved
from 8-bit methods like PTQ4DM (Shang et al., 2023) to
more advanced strategies to employ sub-8-bit data types
for the weights such as timestep-aware calibration (Li et al.,
2023), sample-wise dynamic activation quantization (Chen
et al., 2024c), salient channels (Wu et al., 2024), sensitivityaware quantization (Yang et al., 2023), timestep-conditioned
methods (He et al., 2023); (Huang et al., 2024), as well as
extensions to both image (Tang et al., 2024; Zhao et al.,
2024) and video models (Zhao et al., 2025).

+

Data Type 1
Data Type 2

Figure 1. Overview of the LoRaQ pipeline. A linear layer’s
weight matrix W is decomposed into two parallel branches. The
residual branch contains the quantized residual matrix P = W −
Q2 (LΩ)Q2 (ΩT R), quantized with operator Q1 . The low-rank
branch contains the matrices L and R, which are rotated by Ω and
quantized using operator Q2 . We show that inserting Ω between L
and R minimizes quantization error. The rotation matrix is fused
with the low-rank matrices and adds no overhead at inference.

Aggressive 4-bit quantization (W4A4) requires new strategies to overcome outlier sensitivity. Ashkboos et al. (2025);
Liu et al. (2025); Tseng et al. (2024) introduce the use of
rotation matrices to handle outliers of the activations. Zhang
et al. (2025) achieved micro-scaling FP4 attention for inference. Li et al. (2025) consolidated outliers from activations
to weights via smoothing, then decomposed updated weights
using SVD into high-precision low-rank and 4-bit quantized
residual branches, with fused kernels eliminating memory
access overhead for practical W4A4 deployment on GPUs.

2. Related Work
Diffusion models have rapidly advanced and transformed
text-to-image synthesis (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho
et al., 2020). They generate high-quality samples via an
iterative denoising process starting from Gaussian noise.
Recently, the core architecture shifted from U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) to transformer-based backbones
known as DiTs, as pioneered by Peebles & Xie (2023) and
Bao et al. (2023). Enabled by the scalability of the transformer backbone (Vaswani et al., 2017), this shift opened
new opportunities for higher image quality. Key advances
include MM-DiT (Esser et al., 2024) and the FLUX.1 suite
of models (Black-Forest-Labs, 2024) for efficient scaling
and high-resolution image synthesis; and PixArt-α (Chen
et al., 2024b) and PixArt-Σ (Chen et al., 2024a), which
target training strategies and architecture efficiency.

Our method improves offline quantization through data-free
optimization that can be seamlessly integrated into existing quantization approach such as (Xiao et al., 2023) and
Liu et al. (2025). Unlike Li et al. (2025)’s approach of
maintaining a full-precision low-rank branch, we propose a
quantized low-rank branch to reduce data movement overhead, eliminating custom kernel requirements and enabling
flexible mixed-precision weight matrices. In addition, we
show that the combination of higher ranks with narrower
data formats improves the model’s performance.

3. Method
3.1. Quantization Error and Upper Bound

The significant potential of DiTs has motivated the deployment of these models on many resource-constrained devices.
However, DiTs require substantial computation to achieve
high image quality (Xie et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025), which
makes deployment challenging, particularly with efficient
narrow data types. We focus on overcoming this barrier
to enable low-precision inference on resource-constrained
devices while preserving image generation quality. Quantizing DiTs presents several new challenges. Modern GPUs’
development enables mixed precision operations, calling
for both weight and activation quantization. This is complicated by substantial data variation across token, condition,

Following the formulation of Li et al. (2025), we examine
a linear transformation with input matrix X ∈ Rm×d and
weight matrix W ∈ Rd×n , where m, n, and d correspond
to the dimensions of input, output and hidden features, respectively. We can express the quantization error as
E(X, W ) = ∥XW − Q(X)Q(W )∥F ,

(1)

where ∥·∥F represents the Frobenius norm and Q is a quantization operator. The quantization error admits the following
2

LoRaQ: Optimized Low Rank Approximation for 4-bit Quantization

upper bound:
E(X, W ) ≤ ∥X − Q(X)∥F ∥W ∥F
+ ∥Q(X)∥F ∥W − Q(W )∥F .

definition, it means that applying the quantization function
twice is equivalent to applying it once: we define the image of Q as I, then Q(X) = X, ∀X ∈ I. According to
Equation 3, the equality implies that (W + LR) ∈ I. Thus,
Q(W + LR) = W + LR. Using this property, it is sufficient to find a low-rank perturbation matrix D = LR in
order to approximate the quantization error as a low-rank
matrix.

(2)

See Appendix B.1 for the proof. This reveals that the
quantization error is constrained by the quantization discrepancies in the original matrices ∥W − Q(W )∥F and
∥X − Q(X)∥F . Our method focuses on reducing ∥W −
Q(W )∥F in a more aggressive way than state-of-the-art
methods (Xiao et al., 2023; Li et al., 2025) and is therefore
meant to be implemented along existing smoothing methods
that focus on reducing ∥X − Q(X)∥F .

Thus, we propose to solve the optimization problem

L∗ , R∗ = arg min∥Q(W + LR) − W − LR∥F
L,R

∝ arg min L(Q(W + LR) − W , LR) ,

(4)

L,R

where L is the Mean Squared Error loss.
3.2. Absorbing the Quantization Error

Indeed, using this approximation of D, we can now compute
a gradient of our loss function with respect to L and R as
detailed in Appendix B.2.

Following the emerging paradigm of incorporating fullprecision low-rank branches into quantized linear layers
to mitigate quantization error (Li et al., 2025), we propose a
novel approach that directly approximates the quantization
error using a low-rank matrix that can be quantized. We
argue that this strategy is more effective than approximating
the weight matrix itself with a low-rank decomposition, as
our method provides explicit quantization error compensation, which adapts to the quantization operator and the
chosen data format. Intuitively, the quantization function
introduces structure in the error space that previous methods
fail to exploit.

This allows us to iteratively update the low-rank matrices
L and R using gradient descent, effectively absorbing the
quantization error into a low-rank structure that can be efficiently handled during inference with a fixed rank defined.
This rank can be chosen based on the desired trade-off
between computational efficiency and quantization error
correction, allowing for flexible deployment and further
improvements.
We initialize L and R using the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of W . This allows us to find the matrix of a
predefined rank ρ, M = L0 R0 , L0 ∈ Rd×ρ , R0 ∈ Rρ×n
such that M = minB /rank(B)=ρ ∥W − B∥F . As Li et al.
(2025), we found it to be a good initialization for our optimization algorithm, where L = −L0 and R = R0 .

Specifically, we seek to find a new point in the input space
of the quantization function that shapes the quantization
error to a low-rank matrix such that the quantization error
can be expressed as
Ŵ − W = Q(W + D) − W = LR

(3)
3.3. Quantizing Higher-rank Matrices

where Ŵ is the quantized version of the new point in the
input space. D ∈ Rd×n is a perturbation matrix, L ∈ Rd×ρ
and R ∈ Rρ×n for a fixed ρ ≪ d, n. The key insight is
that by strategically shifting the original weight matrix W
with D, we can obtain a quantization error that exhibits
inherent low-rank structure, thereby enabling efficient error
approximation.

Considering the data formats available in hardware architectures (Microsoft et al., 2023; Li et al., 2025; Zhang et al.,
2025), we can define a budget β as the maximum allowable memory and computation resources for the low-rank
branch in our approximation. β is defined by the number
of bits we require per channel for the low-rank branch. For
example, SVDQuant uses a float16 low-rank branch with
ρ = 32 for its 4-bit quantization, thus allocating a budget of
β = 16 bits/value × 32 values/channel = 512 bits/channel
for the low-rank branch.

We can express the search of the new point as a gradient
descent optimization problem where we minimize the difference between the quantized version of the perturbed weight
matrix Ŵ and the original weight matrix W , subject to the
constraint that the error is low-rank. However, considering
that the derivative of the quantization function is zero almost
everywhere, we cannot directly compute the gradient of the
quantization function with respect to the perturbation matrix
D.

In our case, optimizing a low-rank matrix to find a solution
easily leads to a local minimum. However, the higher the
rank of the matrix, the better the lower local minimum we
find. To respect a budget β and leverage the benefits of
higher rank representations, we also suggest quantizing the
low-rank branch. We find that the accuracy gains from
using a higher rank outweigh the loss from quantizing the
low-rank matrices.

Instead, we can reformulate the problem by considering
the quantization function as an idempotent operator. By
3

